ZMap Meeting


Date: 23.03.2005


Present: Richard, Ed, Roy


Decisions:

It was agreed that we need to work more on the integration of zmap into
the otterlace system. To this end the launching of both xace and zmap from
otterlace should be possible.  Whilst we have a prototype working,
which has replaced xace with zmap and a sgifaceserver, it is by no means
production quality and needs work.

Currently using Compara and a DAS server to dynamically serve align
features appears to be off the cards at the moment.  It was decided a
static solution, most probably for the NOD/normal mouse comparisons that
Charlie Steward is working on would be a good start to a)  provide the
data to prototype the display and b) create a visualisation tool for
Charlie's annotation efforts.

There was some discusion about two way communication between zmap and the 
Perl/Tk layer of otterlace to facilitate a richer user experience.  James 
has already requested a feature of the new interface should be to request 
information from zmap and the concept of zmap being able to send otterlace 
information when something changes in zmap sounds like a reasonable 
possibly in terms of implementation.

The demonstration of zmap highlighted a number of issues with respect to 
the GUI interaction.  
 - A selected feature should be highlighted in all views
 - A selected feature should have it's "friends" highlighted
 - Zooming and scrolling should be "locked" by default and user 
   "unlockable".  
 - A v-split should by default lock the vertical scrolling between a pair 
   of views
 - A h-split should by default lock the horizontal scrolling between a 
   pair of views
 - scrolling should by default be locked between a pair of views
 - the display should be centred on click
 - Rich visualisation should be possible from context menus. e.g. the 
   spliting of an intron to display the whole gene, 5' end of the intron 
   and 3' end. (see attachment split_intron.png)
 - the currently focused view should be more obviously the currently 
   focused view

It was agreed we should provide a release/demonstration version of zmap 
for each meeting.

It was agreed the website needs further organisation/work and that a 
zmap@sanger.ac.uk mail alias/list is a good idea.

Our next meeting will be in three weeks at 1.00pm on the 19th April.




