==============================================================================
ZMap/Otterlace Development


Date:  Thursday 20th August 2009

Attendees: ml6, edgrif, kj2, lw2, jla1, br2


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CURRENT ITEMS

A request was made by kj2 to divide the high priority items into separate
sections so the layout is a bit different this time.


Items Completed
---------------

Otterlace 2/ (RT 123984) zebrafish otter<->ensembl mapping needed


High priority
-------------


*** Otterlace

1/ Tick boxed for controlled vocabulary

STILL WAITING FOR THIS, ESPECIALLY Clone-finished BUTTON.

Current ensembl API now being used on client, but has not yet been well tested
in test_otterlace since blixem problems have prevented its use for annotation.

jgrg plans to add keywords chosen from popup-menus (shown in the menu bar too)
which add non-editable green keywords to the transcript and locus remark
boxes. Aims to get single keyword system working within 1 week.

Ticket (RT 74115) has been updated with an organised list of the vocabulary.

FEC/LEC/TEC will be replaced by "For Experimental Confirmation" for both
transcripts and loci.

Locus and clone finished / FSV will become "Annotation Complete" for both loci
and clones.


2/ removing evidence already used

Annotators would like to be able to remove from display homologies that have
already been used to annotate variants etc.

Does this need to be persistent in the database in some way?

Showing which evidence has been used (RT 24526). Differential coloring of
matches that have been used already as evidence for a transcript

Ed is fixing the addressing of features so that this can be done. Changing the
style of a feature will change its appearance, and/or move it to a new column.


3/ lace opening of clones in single zmap window

kj2 reported a bug in lace interface which means you can't open clones into a
single zmap window in any order that you want. Laurens has a problem running
two Zmaps in two lace sessions in test_otterlace (RT 125341).


6/ feature grouping tags (e.g. for 5'and 3' EST read pairs)

jgrg and edgrif met and agreed a set of tags we could use to group acedb
objects. edgrif has sent jgrg the cluster tags which need to be incorporated
into lace models and data.

To group matches to exons from mRNAs see item 8 (RT 111149 & 111150) in Zmap
section.

7/ Wiggle plots

wiggle plots showing cumulative read numbers need adding to pipeline and hence
to zmap, should be part of "semantic" zooming package. This requires that lace
precomputes the data for ZMap to display.

*** ZMap

1/ (RT 115511) ZMap - dynamic addition of columns from lace.

jgrg needs to be able to add columns to zmap, they have the interface in
lace to allow users to load data later but currently need to restart zmap.
gr5 has been working on this, edgrif will look at the latest status of all this.


2/ (RT 111154) ZMap Better match <-> transcript interactions

jla1 said she would like to be able to click on an exon and see evidence (and
transcripts ?) with the same splice be highlighted. laurens also wants this
as it would often avoid having to open dotter to check. Apollo does this in
a good way and we should.

As a starter we could highlight only matches in alignment columns that had
been bumped.

There seems to be some confusion where with what rds did with marking features,
edgrif to check up.


3/ (RT 117349) ZMap - Acedb Unique IDs

Zmap needs a way to identify uniquely each feature it draws to allow
operations such as searching/editing etc Originally zmap constructed
these IDs from the incoming GFF but acedb emits GFF that does not
identify each feature uniquely. Ed and Roy have come up with a scheme
to solve this and it needs implementing but _after_ styles are complete.


4/ (RT 68777) ZMap - load GFF from an http source

Graham wants to view his homology code results in zmap which he wants to
do by providing an http source which will send gff format data to zmap.

As a stop gap he is using a gff file which is read by zmap. He now needs
Item 2/ above. 

edgrif to find out what the status of this item is.

5/ (RT 111152) Zmap multi-view interactions

kj2 would like to click on a feature in one view and see it highlighted in another
so that she can look for genes present in more than one clone. 

edgrif to do this now....

6/ (RT 84213) ZMap navigator display

It isn't possible to show the whole sequence with the scrollable area and the
visible area superimposed because the visible area will pretty much always be
just one pixel wide. Roy instead made the navigator display the scrollable
area (the scale shows where you are) with the visible window within that.

lw2 requested that a symbolic line be displayed where the viewable area is
anyway. lw2 to check and report back.


7/ (RT 111147) ZMap - as an ensembl viewer

Graham has a perl script called "enZembl", which attaches Zmap to an ensembl
database. He is waiting for fixes to the feature addressing code in Zmap.

8/ (RT 111149 & 111150) acedb/zmap vulgar string support

After discussions with Guy Slater it was decided that we should push for
ensembl to support vulgar strings and we would also support them as
this will enable us to fully support exonerate output which will have
many benefits for the annotator and for us in terms of memory usage and
feature clustering. edgrif reported that acedb now supports cigar and vulgar
strings, both can be passed through to zmap, cigar strings can also be
mapped/displayed in acedb.



*** General

1/ Planning software - Omniplan, Redmine....

There was a discussion about web based versus local versions of planning
software with there being support for a web-based version but we have
bought Omniplan now so it was agreed that we would try it for 6 months
and see how far we got. There are licenses for Tim, Kerstin, Jen, James
and Ed. edgrif to provide what he has done so far in omniplan.

We need to agree a mechanism for sharing a single plan file.

kj2 suggested using Redmine, a free web-based app, edgrif to investigate.


2/ Alias/renaming of Loci

Requires meeting with HGNC and others, Sept ??

jgrg has been advising MGI as there are problems with IDs from them. HGNC mapping
of otter ids to HGNC ids is flaky. The issue is still to be finally resolved.

There have been problems with Entrez Gene ids and chromosome positions, jla1
said pseudogenes should not be imported at the moment.

-st3 asked about naming of alternative alleles in different mouse strains / human
haplotypes. For loci that don't have HGNC/MGI names, these are incorrectly named after
the clones on the reference sequence.  jla1 suggested correctly naming them after the
clones they are on, but making sure that the annotators can see the associated
'reference assembly' gene. st3 said this could be done via the alt_allele table, and
if it were done across the board, ie including KNOWN genes, then this would make Vega
prep easier

-kj2 asked jgrg for a script to help with controlling renaming/aliasing, jgrg said
he has something that will help.


3/ RT numbers

It was agreed that where possible RT ticket numbers would be included in the
meetings notes. lw2, edgrif, jgrg to look up numbers.

edgrif said he would be opening tickets for his issues as many of them are not
covered by existing tickets.


4/ SNP tracks

Waiting for a data source to be provided.

jla1 would like some of the DAS tracks & other data sources currently available
to be put into lace and hence zmap (DBSNP/Ensemble). jgrg said that this is not
immediately straight forward as they don't all say which assembly they are based
on but some can be done fairly soon. e.g. comparacon ? jgrg to investigate.

Looks like it's best to wait until Ensemble has the data. jgrg is to check up on
this.




Medium priority
---------------

0/ new column bump to show inconsistent matches

Often annotator has many matches that fit against an existing transcript, be good
to have a mode that hid these and only showed the ones inconsistent with the
transcripts splices.


1/ dotter error messages

lw2 said that sometimes dotter just does not appear. edgrif to check that dotter
is reporting errors properly and to make sure they show in dialog windows not on
the terminal which is often not available to the annotator.


2/ Viewing different assemblies for a chromosome

kj2 will in the future want to be able to choose between different assemblies
and view them to check likely validity amongst other things. edgrif said a
possible way to to do this would be for otterlace to produce a separate lace
database for each assembly, each of which could be displayed as a separate
"view" by zmap. This would be a clean way to do it but my raise problems
for lace with locking of clones and ensuring that when a gene is edited on
one assembly it is updated on others.



3/ Locus list

jgrg to provide a list of loci as another tab window. + searching on ensembl ids.




5/ bug in acedb server

jgrg raised a bug in the server which was causing it run out of memory, edgrif
to investigate. There is a ticket for this: 51894

edgrif to make jgrg has up to date binaries for dotter etc.


6/ popups/labels for transcripts

jla1 said that apollo had a neat way of showing a label for a transcript
that remained in one place on the screen as the window was scrolled. edgrif
to investigate + look at "tool tips" for transcripts....especially with
locus information. 

7/ Lock loci - eg: encode loci so that they can't be edited without permission



------------------------------------------------------------------------------
BACK-BURNER ITEMS



ZMap/acedb
----------

1/ Interface issues:


jla1 and lw2 said they would like the marked area to be less obvious an also to
be a "greying" out rather than blue and with less dense dots. edgrif to implement.




2/ Display of multiple compara alignments

multiple alignments: edgrif is about a third of the way through implementing a
more general way of displaying arbitrary blocks.  This will become a high
priority item as we move to haplotypes etc.

th said this would be needed soon so it should be moved up the priority list.
jgrg said they have mappings in lace that could be passed on to zmap easily
and also said that annotators can already annotate assemblies from variants
and different species alongside each other as needed.

We need to decide on the format for specifying the alignments.



3/ alternative translations: edgrif about half way through code to do this.

edgrif is doing this as part of the protein search code since this code
does translations itself. edgrif will talk to jgrg about how alternative
genetic codes can be specified with acedb.

We need a test database for this. jgrg said this would come soon.

edgrif will add field to transcript feature to hold alternative translation
table.


4/ Blixem enhancements

two areas:

- display multiple overlapping transcripts better (includes removing the many
yellow lines introduced by this...clarify this point), have a scrolled window
of the transcripts. jgrg said that perhaps only the transcripts made by havana
should be displayed. jla1 said she would like to be able to dynamically update
the transcripts displayed.

- better interaction with zmap, e.g. click on things in zmap and see them 
highlighted in blixem and vice versa....

we had better have a more generalised protocol for communicating with external
programs....

- blixem: dna searching is NOT DONE, edgrif to expedite. Also protein searches
will be added.

Perhaps one way to get this done would be employ a good C programmer on a
short contract.


5/ acedb server performance

edgrif investigating two possibilities for improving performance:

	- make sgifaceserver stream data rather than batch it up, would
	  save a lot of memory.

	- deferred loading, only load features when needed and load in
	  zone requested by user....design done...now need to implement.


6/ A new canvas

rds has been looking at alternative canvas implementations which offer an MVC
model. He has managed to get goocanvas developers to fix some bugs and make
some changes to support our needs.

the goocanvas MVC model will mean we do not have to copy data to split windows
meaning greatly reduced memory usage.

the goocanvas will cope automatically with the X Windows window size limit, this
combined with changes in the gtk scrolling model means we will be able to do away
with having two scroll bars.

We will introduce the new canvas this year.




Otterlace
---------

1/ Alternative alignment programs

There has been some discussion about using splice aware alignment programs.
jgrg is waiting for a fix to exonerate to support the new pipeline mustapha
has written.

edgrif and jgrg both commented that some changes to acedb data structures
would be needed to represent both HSP's that are "joined up" but also 
protein matches that start part of the way through a peptide. BUT one
possibility would be for zmap to access this data directly from a mysql
database thus sidestepping the need to put it in acedb first. gffv3 will also
be needed to represent this kind of joined up HSP data in a natural and
robust way.

Changes will also be required to represent codons that are spliced across
introns as perhaps surprisingly none of the acedb programs can cope with
this currently (and neither can zmap).


2/ Spell checker

jla1 reported a problem that free text fields and some fixed text fields
have misspellings (is that a mis-spelling ?) and it would be good to have
some autocorrection facility. The ideal would be to have some widget that
allowed other dictionaries (e.g. science) to be attached to it and could thus
be used as a general text entry tool.



3/ Sequence exceptions

kj2 raised the subject of how to indicate sequence exceptions,
e.g. when bases are skipped in translations. kj2 wondered if alternative
translations could be registered as sequence exceptions, edgrif said he
prefer a separate mechanism as much of the code is already done for this.
We should therefore include a mechanism in zmap for sequence exceptions,
this would require a similar mechanism in acedb. This is yet another reason
for GFF 3 which has standards for frame shifts and other things.

There should be a way of tagging transcripts where there are sequence
exceptions.




------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Next Meeting

Will be at 2pm, 3rd September 2009


==============================================================================
