ZMap Meeting


Date: 23.04.2005


Present: Richard, Ed, Roy, Rob


ZMap/otterlace:

Roy has a prototype system with lace starting simultaneous xace/zmap processes
which is good for comparison. He has been working on the atom/property
communication system as the existing xremote code cannot give us all that we
want.

Roy has added code to Perl/Tk to do atoms/properties...amazingly this is
missing from the Tk interface. We have a working system so that James can
write perl to directly control the atoms/properties to communicate with
zmap. A substantial improvement over the old system.


Compara:

We have not worked on this more.



zmap GUI:

Ed has been working on locking of windows and this is working, highlighting is
on the way.

The currently focussed view is more obvious but its hard work with gtk.

The code is now in-place to more quickly do things like the intelligent viewing
of transcripts.



ZMap demo code/website/mail:

There is now a ~acedb/ZMap, the demo code for alphas is:
~acedb/ZMap/ZMap/src/zmap

We now have a "zmap" mail alias set to Ed, Roy and Rob.

Rob will be doing some work to set up web pages for the web site.



Decisions:

We need to produce a demonstration of zmap working alongside of xace in the
lace system that is good enough that an annotator can start to try it out. In
particular this needs to show how zmap will display multiple alignments as
this is seen as a key factor in annotators wanting to use zmap at all.

Ed will:

	- this week send out an email to James, Jen, Tim (cc'ing us) saying
	that we will produce the demonstration zmap, giving an idea of what
	it will do and suggesting/soliciting opinions about who would be
	a good person to test it.

	- send Richard an email on 9th May detailing more precisely what the
	demo. zmap will do, how it can be used etc.

We will produce the demo. zmap for the 23rd May to show to Richard in our next
zmap team meeting on that day. The demo. will need to include facilities that
the annotators commonly use e.g. blixem.

An obvious annotator would be Charlie as he is working the NOD and Black6
mouse variants and this would provide a good test of the multiple alignment
display.


We also discussed:

- we need to decide on the semantics of single/double clicking on features

- the feature list needs some enhancements/fixes (e.g. it should centre on the
feature the user clicked on).

- we could allow the user to supply a list of their own features (like the
"keyset" concept of acedb), this would not necessarily be features of the same
type. This would be useful but is not seen as a priority.



Our next meeting will be in three weeks at 1.00pm on the 23rd May.


